DON QUIXOTE OF LA MANCHA
Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra

PART ONE
CHAPTER 1: Which treats of the condition and exercise of the famous gentleman Don Quixote of La Mancha
In a place in La Mancha, the name of which I do not wish to remember, there lived not long ago a gentleman of the kind with a lance in a shipyard, an old buckler, a skinny deer, and a running greyhound. A pot of something more cow than mutton, salpicón on most nights, duels and quebrantos on Saturdays, lentils on Fridays, some added palomino on Sundays, consumed the three parts of his hacienda. The rest of the day was filled with a veiling dress, hairy leggings for the festivities with their slippers of the same, on weekdays they were honored with their finest velori. He had in his house a housekeeper who was over forty, and a niece who was not quite twenty, and a porter of the country and square, who saddled the horse as well as took the pruning shear. Our gentleman was about fifty years of age, of strong complexion, withered of flesh, and lean of face; Great early riser and friend of hunting. They mean that she had the surname of Quijada or Quesada (in this there is some difference in the authors who write in this case), although by plausible conjectures it is implied that her name is Quijana; but this matters little to our tale; it is enough that in the narration of it not a point of truth is strayed. It is to be known, then, that this aforesaid gentleman, in the moments when he was idle (which was the most of the year) gave himself to reading books of chivalry with such fondness and pleasure, that he almost forgot the exercise of hunting, and even the administration of his estate; and his curiosity and folly in this matter became so great that he sold many bushels of sowing land, to buy books of chivalry in which to read; and so he brought home as many as he could have of them; and of all of them seemed so good to him as those composed by the famous Feliciano de Silva: for the clearness of his prose, and those intricate reasons of his, seemed to him to be pearls; And all the more so when I came to read those requisitions and letters of defiance, where in many places I found written: The reason of the unreason that is done to my reason, in such a way that my reason is weakened, that I rightly complain of your beauty, and also when I read: the high heavens that of your divinity are divinely fortified by the stars,  and they make you worthy of the merit that your greatness deserves. With these and similar reasons the poor gentleman lost his senses, and strove to understand them, and to unravel their meaning, so that he would not take them from him, nor would Aristotle himself understand them, if he were resurrected for that purpose alone. He was not very well with the wounds that Don Belianis gave and received, because he imagined that no matter how great masters he had been healed, his face and whole body would not cease to be full of scars and marks; but yet he praised its author for ending his book with the promise of that never-ending adventure, and many times he felt the desire to take up his pen, and finish it to the letter as promised; and no doubt he would do it, and even get away with it, if other greater and continual thoughts did not hinder him.
He often had competition with the priest of his place (who was a learned man graduated from Sigüenza), as to which had been the better knight, Palmerin of England or Amadis of Gaul; but Master Nicholas, a barber of the same town, said that no one came close to the knight of Phoebus, and that if any one could be compared with him, it was Don Galaor, brother of Amadis of Gaul, for he was in a very comfortable condition for everything; that he was not a fussy gentleman, nor so much a crybaby as his brother, and that in the matter of courage he was not far behind.
In short, he became so engrossed in his reading that his nights were spent reading from clear to clear, and his days from murky to murky, and so, from little sleep and much reading, his brain dried up, so that he came to lose his senses. His imagination was filled with all that he read in books, as well with enchantments, as well as with quarrels, battles, challenges, wounds, quarrels, loves, storms, and impossible nonsense, and it became so settled in his imagination that the whole machine of those dreamed inventions he read was true, that for him there was no other
the truest story in the world.
He said that El Cid Ruy Díaz had been a very good gentleman; but that it had nothing to do with the knight with the fiery sword, who with only one blow had split two fierce and colossal giants in half. He was better off with Bernardo del Carpio, for in Roncesvalle Roland the Enchanted had been slain, by the industry of Hercules, when he drowned Antaeus, the son of Earth, in his arms. He spoke much good of the giant Morgante, for though he was of that gigantic generation, which is all proud and unrestrained, he alone was affable and well-bred; but above all he was well with Reinaldos de Montalban, and the more so when he saw him go out of his castle and steal as many as he came across, and when in Allende he stole that idol of Mahomet, which was all gold, according to his story. He would give a hand to kick the traitor of Galalon, the mistress he had, and even his niece in addition.
In fact, when his judgment was finished, he came upon the strangest thought that ever came to mind in the world, and that was that it seemed to him expedient and necessary, both for the increase of his honour and for the service of his republic, to become a knight-errant, and to go all over the world with his arms and horse in search of adventures.  and to exercise himself in all that he had read, which knights-errant exercised themselves, undoing every kind of wrong, and placing themselves in occasions and dangers, where, by putting an end to them, they might acquire eternal name and fame.
The poor man imagined that he was already crowned by the valour of his arm, at least, with the empire of Trapisonda: and so with these pleasant thoughts, carried away by the strange pleasure he felt in them, he hastened to put into effect what he desired. And the first thing he did was to clean some weapons, which had belonged to his great-grandfathers, which, taken from rust and full of mold, had been laid out and forgotten in a corner for many centuries. He cleaned and dressed them as best he could; but he saw that they had a great fault, and that was that he had no lace helmet, but a simple morion; but to this he supplied his industry, for of cardboard he made a mode of half-veil, which, fitted with the morion, made the appearance of a whole veil. It is true that in order to test whether he was strong, and might be in danger of being slashed, he drew his sword, and gave it two blows, and with the first and in one point undid what he had done in a week: and it did not fail to seem to him that he had broken it to pieces, and in order to make sure of this danger,  He did it again, putting iron bars on the inside in such a way that he was satisfied with his strength; and, not wishing to make a new experience of it, he deputized it and considered it a very fine lace veil. Then he went to see his horse, and although he had more quarters than a real, and more studs than Gonela's horse, which tantum pellis, et ossa fuit, it seemed to him that neither Alexander's Bucephalus nor Babieca's Cid's were equal to him. Four days were spent in imagining what name he could call it: for, as he said to himself, it was not right that a knight's horse so famous, and so good in itself, should be without a known name; and so he endeavoured to accommodate himself, so that he might declare who he had been, before he was a knight-errant, and what he was then: for he was very reasonable, that by changing his lord's state, he should also change his name; and to make him famous and noisy, as befitted the new order and the new exercise which he already professed: and so, after many names which he formed, obliterated and removed, added, unmade, and remade in his memory and imagination, at last he came to call him Rocinante, a name which seemed to him to be high, sonorous, and significant of what he had been when he was a dew;  before it was, it was before and first of all the sprinklers in the world. Having given his horse a name, and so much to his liking, he wished to give it to himself, and in this thought he lasted another eight days, and at length he came to be called Don Quixote, whence as has been said, the authors of this true story took the opportunity, which must doubtless have been called Quijada, and not Quesada as others would have said. But remembering that the valiant Amadis had not only contented himself with calling himself Amadis plainly, but had added the name of his kingdom and country to make it famous, and called himself Amadis of Gaul, he wished, like a good knight, to add to his own the name of his own, and to call himself Don Quixote of La Mancha, by which he seemed to be declaring his
lineage and country, and honored her by taking the nickname of her.
When he had cleansed his weapons, made his hat veiled, given a name to his dew, and confirmed himself, he made it clear that he had nothing left but to seek a lady with whom he could fall in love, for the knight-errant without love was a tree without leaves and without fruit, and a body without a soul. He said to himself, "If, because of my sins, because of my good fortune, I meet some giant, as knights-errant usually do, and knock him down in one encounter, or cut him in half, or finally defeat him and surrender him, will it not be good to have someone to send him to present?  and let him come in and kneel before my sweet lady, and say in a humble and surrendered voice: "I, madam, am the giant Caraculiambro, lord of the island of Malindrania, whom the knight Don Quixote of La Mancha defeated in a singular battle, who commanded me to present myself before your worship,  that your greatness may dispose of me at her will? Oh, how our good gentleman rejoiced when he had made this discourse, and still more when he found someone to name his lady! And it was, it is believed, that in a place near his there was a peasant girl of very good looks, with whom he was once in love, although it is understood that she never knew it or was aware of it. Her name was Aldonza Lorenzo, and she thought it right to give her the title of mistress of her thoughts; and looking for a name for her that would not be too different from her own, and that would lead to that of princess and great lady, he came to call her Dulcinea del Toboso, because she was a native of El Toboso, a name that seemed to him to be a musician and a pilgrim and significant, like all the others he had given to him and his affairs.
Chapter 2: Which deals with the first departure from his land that the ingenious Don Quixote made
Having taken these precautions, therefore, he did not wish to wait any longer to put his thoughts into effect, pressing upon him the fault which he thought his tardiness was making in the world, according to the wrongs which he intended to undo, the wrongs which he thought to be righted, the wrongs to be corrected, and the abuses to be improved, and the debts to be satisfied; and so, without informing any person of his intention, and without anyone seeing him, one morning, before daylight (which was one of the hottest days of the month of July), he armed himself with all his weapons, mounted Rocinante, put on his ill-composed veil, fastened his buckler, took his lance, and through the false door of a corral,  He went out into the field with great joy and exultation to see how easily he had begun his good wish. But scarcely had he seen himself in the field, when a terrible thought assailed him, and such a thought as to almost make him abandon the enterprise he had begun: and it came to his mind that he was not an armed knight, and that, according to the law of chivalry, he could not and ought not to take up arms with any knight; and since he was one, he was to carry bladed weapons, like a novice knight, without a company in the shield, until he had won it by his exertion.
These thoughts made him waver in his purpose; but his madness being more powerful than any other reason, he proposed to have himself knighted by the first he came across, in imitation of many others who had done so, as he had read in the books that had him in this way. As for the bladed weapons, he intended to clean them in such a way that they would be more so than an ermine, and with this he quieted down and went on his way, taking no other than that which his horse wanted, believing that in that was the strength of adventure. So as our new adventurer was walking, he was talking to himself, and saying, "Who doubts but that in times to come, when the true history of my famous deeds comes to light, the wise man who writes them will not, when he comes to tell this my first outing so early in the morning, put it in this way?" "Scarcely had the ruddy Apollo spread over the face of the broad and spacious earth the golden strands of his beautiful hair, and scarcely had the little painted birds with their harpy tongues greeted with sweet and mellifluous harmony the coming of the rosy dawn which, leaving the soft bed of the jealous husband, through the doors and balconies of the horizon of La Mancha was shown to mortals,  when the famous knight Don Quixote of La Mancha, leaving his idle feathers, mounted his famous horse Rocinante, and began to walk through the ancient and well-known field of Montiel." (And it was true that he walked through it) and he added, saying: "Happy age, and happy century is he where my famous deeds will come to light, worthy to be carved in bronze, carved in marble, and sculpted in marble, and painted on tablets for memory in the future. O thou wise enchanter, whoever thou art to be the crowner of this pilgrim history! I beg you not to forget my good Rocinante, my eternal companion in all my ways and careers." Then he returned, saying, as if he were truly in love: "O princess Dulcinea, mistress of this captive heart! You have done me much wrong in taking leave of me, and reproaching me with the rigorous acquiescence of commanding me not to appear before your beauty. Be satisfied, madam, with the members of this subject heart of yours, which suffers so much for your love."
With these he skewered other nonsense, all in the manner of those which his books had taught him, imitating as far as he could their language; And with this he walked so leisurely, and the sun came in so quickly and with such ardour, that it would be enough to melt his brains, if he had any. For the most part of that day he walked without anything happening to him to relate, of which he despaired, lest he should afterwards meet with whom he might experience the value of his strong arm.
There are authors who say that the first adventure that came to him was that of Puerto Lápice; others say that of the windmills; but what I have been able to ascertain in this case, and what I have found written in the annals of La Mancha, is that he walked all that day, and in the evening he and his wife were tired and tired.
starving to death; and that looking round and round to see if he could discover any castle or a herd of shepherds where he could retreat, and where he could relieve his great need, he saw, not far from the road along which an inn was going, which was as if he saw a star, leading him to the portals, if not to the citadels of his redemption. He hurried on, and reached it in time for nightfall. There were perhaps at the door two young women, of those who call the party, who were going to Seville with some muleteers, who happened to make the journey at the inn that night; and as to our adventurer everything he thought, saw, or imagined, seemed to be done and to pass into the manner of what he had read, as soon as he saw the inn it was represented to him that it was a castle with its four towers and spires of shining silver, not wanting its drawbridge and deep cellar, with all those adherents that such castles are painted.
He came to the inn (which seemed to him to be a castle), and a short distance from it he stopped Rocinante's reins, waiting for some dwarf to stand among the battlements to signal with some trumpet that a knight was coming to the castle; but when he saw that they were delayed, and that Rocinante was in a hurry to reach the stable, he went to the door of the inn, and saw the two absent-minded who were there, who seemed to him to be two beautiful maidens, or two graceful ladies, who were taking solace before the castle gate. By chance it happened that a swineherd, who was gathering a herd of pigs (for they are unpardonably called) out of some stubble, blew a horn, at the signal of which they gathered, and at once it appeared to Don Quixote what he desired, which was that some dwarf should make a sign of his coming, and so with strange joy he arrived at the inn and the ladies.  who, when they saw a man of that kind coming, armed, and with spear and buckler, were going to enter the inn full of fear; but Don Quixote, gathering his fear by his flight, raised his visor of paper, and uncovered his dry and dusty face, said to them with a gentle disposition and a calm voice, "Do not go, your worships, do not fear any misfortune, for it is not the business of any one to obey the order of chivalry which I profess, much less to such high damens;  as your presences demonstrate. The girls looked at him, and walked with their eyes looking for the face that the bad visor concealed from him; but when they heard themselves called damsels, which was so far out of their profession, they could not help laughing, and so it was that Don Quixote came to run and say to them, "Moderation seems well in the beautiful women, and the laughter that proceeds from a slight cause is a great deal besides; but I do not say this because you are acquainted with each other, nor show a bad disposition, for mine is not for whom I can serve you.
The ununderstood language of the ladies, and the bad figure of our gentleman, increased their laughter and his anger; and he would have gone a long way, if the landlord had not come out at that point, a man who, being very fat, was very peaceful, who, seeing this figure in a shambles, armed with such unequal weapons as the bridle, lance, buckler, and tail, did not take any part in accompanying the maidens in the demonstrations of their contentment; but, in fact, fearing the machine of so many accoutrements, he determined to speak to him in a measured manner, and thus said to him: "If your worship, sir knight, seeks an inn, besides the bed (for there is none in this inn), everything else will be found in it in great abundance." Don Quixote, perceiving the humility of the warden of the fortress (for he thought the innkeeper and the inn were such), replied, "For me, Senor Castilian, anything will do, for my harness is arms, my rest is fighting, etc."
The guest thought that the fact that he had been called a Castilian had been because he had seemed to him to be from the bosom of Castile, although he was an Andalusian, and of those from the beach of Sanlúcar, no less a thief than Caco, nor less a scoundrel than a student or a page. And so he answered, "According to that, your worship's beds will be hard rocks, and your sleep will always be watching; and this being so, it may well be safely disembarked from finding in this hut an occasion and occasion for not sleeping for a whole year, much less for a night. And so saying, he went to take Don Quixote by the stirrup, and he alighted with much difficulty and labor, like one who had not eaten his breakfast all that day. Then he told the guest to take great care of his horse.
because it was the best piece of bread in the world. The landlord looked at him, and did not think it as good as Don Quixote had said, not even half as good; and settling him in the stable, he saw again what his guest commanded; which was being disarmed by the maidens (who had already been reconciled to him), who, although they had removed his breastplate and back, never knew how to dislodge his throat, nor took off his veiled back, which he had tied with green ribbons, and had to be cut off, as the knots could not be broken; but he would not consent to it in any way; and so he remained all that night with the veil on, which was the most graceful and strange figure that could be imagined; and when they disarmed him (as he fancied that those who had brought him and carried him apart were some of the principal ladies and gentlemen of that castle), he said to them with great grace:
Never was a knight of ladies so well served, as Don Quixote was when he came from his village; maidens cured him, princesses of his Rocino.
O Rocinante, for this is the name, my ladies, of my horse, and Don Quixote of La Mancha mine; for as I did not wish to be discovered by the old romance of Lancelot, the force of accommodating this old romance of Lancelot to the present purpose, has caused you to know my name before all season; but the time will come when your lordships will command me, and I will obey, and the courage of my arm will reveal the desire I have to serve you. The girls, who were not accustomed to hear such rhetoric, did not answer a word; They just asked him if he wanted to eat anything. "Any one would do it," replied Don Quixote, "for as far as I understand it would be very much to the point." That day happened to be Friday, and there were only a few portions of fish in the whole inn, which in Castile they call pollock, and in Andalusia cod, and in other parts curadillo, and in others trout.
They asked him if he would eat trout, for there was no other fish to eat. "If there are plenty of trout," replied Don Quixote, "they will be able to serve as a trueba; Because that's what I'm good at: they give me eight reales in singles, than a piece of eight. How much more, it could be that these trout were like the veal, which is better than the cow, and the kid than the bastard. But be that as it may, let it be that the work and weight of arms cannot be carried without the government of the guts. They set the table for him at the door of the inn for the sake of the cool, and the guest brought him a portion of badly soaked, and worse cooked cod, and a loaf of bread as black and filthy as his weapons. But it was a matter of great laughter to see him eat, for as he had his helmet on and his visor raised, he could not put anything in his mouth with his hands, unless another gave it to him and put it on; and so one of those ladies would be of this duty; but it was not possible to give him a drink, nor would it have been if the innkeeper had not pierced a reed, and put one end in his mouth, and poured the wine into his mouth on the other. And all this he received with patience, in exchange for not breaking the straps of the veil.
While he was thus engaged, a castrator of pigs happened to come to the inn, and as soon as he arrived his reed whistle sounded four or five times, whereupon Don Quixote confirmed that he was in some famous castle, and that he was served with music, and that the pollock was trout, the bread was candeal, and the harlots ladies;  and the Castilian innkeeper of the castle; and with this he considered his determination and departure well spent. But what wearied him most was that he did not see himself made a knight, for it seemed to him that he could not legitimately undertake any adventure without receiving the order of chivalry.
Chapter 3: Where the Graceful Manner in which Don Quixote Made Himself a Knight is Told
And so, wearied with this thought, he abbreviated his venterile and limited supper, which he called to the landlord, and shutting himself up with him in the stable, knelt before him, saying to him, "I will never rise from where I am, valiant knight, until your courtesy will grant me a gift which I want to ask for, which will redound to your praise and to the benefit of the human race." The innkeeper, who saw his guest at his feet, and heard such words, was looking at him in confusion, not knowing what to do or say to him, and insisted with him that he should rise; And she never wanted to, until she had to tell him that he was giving her the gift she asked for. "I expected nothing less from your great magnificence, senor," replied Don Quixote; And so I tell you that the gift which I have asked of you, and of your liberality has been granted me, is that to-morrow, on that day, you will make me a knight, and to-night in the chapel of this your castle I will watch over my arms; and to-morrow, as I have said, what I so much desire will be accomplished, so that I may, as we ought, go to all the four quarters of the world seeking adventures for the needy, as is in charge of chivalry and knights-errant, as I am, whose desire for such feats is inclined.
The landlord, who, as has been said, was a little sarcastic, and already had some presentiments of his guest's want of judgment, came to believe it when he had heard such words, and having to laugh that night, he determined to follow his humour; Thus he told him that he was very right in what he desired and asked, and that such a proposition was proper and natural to knights as great as he seemed, and as his gallant presence showed, and that he had also, in the years of his youth, given himself to that honorable exercise, going about various parts of the world in search of his adventures;  without having left the percheles of Malaga, the islands of Riarán, the compass of Seville, the quicksilver of Segovia, the olive grove of Valencia, the rondilla of Granada, the beach of Sanlúcar, the colt of Cordoba, and the ventillas of Toledo, and other various places where he had exercised the lightness of his feet and the subtlety of his hands, making many one-eyed things, relying many widows,  undoing some maidens, and deceiving many wards, and finally, making himself known to all the courts and tribunals there are almost in the whole of Spain; and that at last he had come to collect himself at his castle, where he lived with all his property and that of others, collecting in it all the knights-errant of whatever quality and condition they might be, only because of the great affection he had for them, and that they might depart with him from his spossessions in payment of his good wishes. He also told him that in his castle there was no chapel where the arms could be kept, because it had been torn down to be built again; but in case of necessity he knew that they could watch wherever he pleased, and that night he could watch them in a courtyard of the castle; that in the morning, God being served, the due ceremonies would be performed so that he would be made a knight, and so knight that he could be no more in the world.
He asked him if he had any money with him, and Don Quixote replied that he had no money, for he had never read in the histories of knights-errant that any of them had brought any. To this the innkeeper said that he was deceiving himself, that since the histories were not written, because it seemed to the authors of the histories that it was not necessary to write something so clear and so necessary to be brought, such as money and clean shirts, it was not for that reason to be believed that they were not brought; And so he had ascertained that all the knights-errant (of whom so many books are full and attested) carried their purses very erroneously because of what might happen to them, and that they also carried shirts and a small chest full of ointments to heal the wounds they received, for not always in the fields and deserts,  Where they fought and were wounded, there was someone to cure them, if it were not that they had some wise enchanter for a friend who would then help them, bringing through the air, in some cloud, some maiden or dwarf with some scoop of water of such virtue, that in tasting a drop of it, then at once
they were healed of their wounds and wounds, as if they had not had any evil; but that until this was the case, the former knights thought it right that their squires should be provided with money and other necessaries, such as thread and ointments for healing; and when it happened that such knights had no squires (which were few and rare), they themselves carried everything in very fine saddlebags, which scarcely resembled the horse's haunches, as it were something else of more importance; for, not being for such an occasion, the carrying of saddlebags was not much accepted among knights-errant; and for this reason he advised him (for he could still command him as his godson, who was to be so quick to do so), not to go henceforth without money and without the precautions referred to, and that he would see how well he was doing with them when he least expected it. Don Quixote promised him to do as he was advised with all punctuality; and so orders were given for the arms to be kept in a large corral which stood on one side of the inn, and Don Quixote, gathering them all, placed them on a basin that stood by a well, and seizing his buckler, he took hold of his lance, and with gentle composure began to walk before the basin; And when the walk began, the night was beginning to close.
The innkeeper told all who were at the inn the folly of his guest, the sail of the guns, and the cavalry frame he was expecting. Astonished at this strange kind of madness, they went to look at him from afar, and saw that, with a calm gesture, he sometimes paced, sometimes leaning on his lance and set his eyes on the weapons without taking them away for a good space from them. The night had just closed; but with such brightness of the moon, that he could compete with the one who lent himself to him, so that whatever the new gentleman did was well regarded by all.
At this moment one of the muleteers who were at the inn fancied to go and give water to his herd, and it was necessary to remove Don Quixote's arms, which were on the basin, who, seeing him approaching, said to him in a loud voice: "O you, whoever you are, daring knight, who come to touch the arms of the bravest knight-errant who ever girded a sword!  Watch what you do, and don't touch them, if you don't want to give up your life in payment for your audacity! The muleteer was not cured of these reasons (and it would be better for him to be cured, because it would be to be cured in health); but, seizing the straps, he threw them away a great distance from himself, which, when Don Quixote saw it, raised his eyes to heaven, and thinking (as it seemed) of his lady Dulcinea, he said, "Help me, my lady, in this first affront that is offered to this subdued breast of yours; Let not your favour and protection discourage me in this first trance; and saying these and similar words, he let go of his buckler, raised his lance with two hands, and with it gave the muleteer such a great blow on the head that he knocked him down on the ground so battered that, if he were seconded with another, he would have no need of a master to cure him. This done, he gathered up his weapons, and walked about again with the same repose as before. From there a little later, without knowing what had happened (for the muleteer was still stunned), another arrived with the same intention of giving water to his mules; and as he had taken away his weapons in order to clear the basin, without speaking a word, and without asking favour of any one, he again let go of the buckler, and raised his lance again, and without breaking it to pieces he made the head of the second muleteer more than three, for he opened it by four. At the noise all the people of the inn came, and among them the innkeeper. Don Quixote, perceiving this, drew up his buckler, and laying his hand on his sword, said, "O lady of beauty, strength, and vigour of my feeble heart, now is the time for you to turn the eyes of your greatness to this your captive knight, who is attending to such an adventure!" With this he took such courage that if all the muleteers in the world attacked him, he would not turn back. The companions of the wounded, who saw them at a distance, began to rain stones upon Don Quixote, who repaired himself as well as he could with his buckler, and did not dare to leave the pile lest he should abandon his arms. The innkeeper cried out to them to leave him, for he had already told them that he was a madman, and that he would be spared because he was mad, even if he killed them all. Don Quixote also called them treacherous and traitors, and that the lord of the castle was a scoundrel and ill-born knight, for he so consented that knights-errant should be treated by knights-errant, and that if he were to be treated by knights-errantry, he would be able to do so.
he would have received the order of chivalry, that he would have given him to understand his treachery; but I take no notice of you, you scoundrel and low scoundrels: shoot, come, come, and offend me as much as you can, for you will see the payment you bear for your folly and excess. He said this with such verve and boldness that it struck a terrible fear into those who assailed him; And by this, as well as by the persuasions of the landlord, they ceased firing at him, and he let the wounded withdraw, and returned to the sail of his arms with the same quietness and tranquillity as before.
The innkeeper did not like the jests of his guest, and he determined to abbreviate and give him the black order of chivalry at once, before another misfortune should befall; and so, going up to him, he excused himself for the insolence which these low people had used with him, without his knowing anything; but how well punished they were for their audacity. He told him, as he had already told him, that there was no chapel in that castle, and that it was not necessary for what remained to be done; that the whole touch of being knighted consisted in the catch and the backing, as he knew of the ceremonial of the order, and that this could be done in the middle of a field; and that he had already accomplished what he had to do at the end of the arms, which was accomplished with only two hours of sail, how much more than he had been more than four. Don Quixote believed everything, and said that he was ready to obey him, and that he should conclude as soon as he could; for if he were again attacked, and found himself armed with a knight, he did not intend to leave any one alive in the castle, except those whom he commanded him, whom he would leave out of respect. The Castilian, being aware of this, immediately brought a book in which he recorded the straw and barley which he gave to the muleteers, and with a sail line brought to him by a boy, and with the two damsels already mentioned, he came to where Don Quixote was, and ordered him to kneel, and reading in his manual as if he were saying some devout prayer,  In the midst of the legend he raised his hand, and gave him a good blow on the neck, and after him with his own sword a gentle slap, always muttering under his breath as if he were praying. When this was done, he ordered one of those ladies to gird him with her sword, which she did with great ease and discretion, for it was not a little necessary not to burst with laughter at every point of the ceremonies; but the exploits they had already seen of the fledgling gentleman kept their laughter at bay. As she girded him with her sword, the good lady said, "God make your worship a very fortunate knight, and give you good fortune in battles." Don Quixote asked him what his name was, that he might henceforth know to whom he was bound for the favour he had received, for he intended to give him some part of the honour he might gain by the valour of his arm. She replied with great humility that her name was La Tolosa, and that she was the daughter of a remendon, a native of Toledo, who lived in the tents of Sancho Bienaya, and that wherever she was she would serve him and take him for her lord. Don Quixote replied that for his love he should do him a favor, that henceforth he should be called Dono, and called himself Dona Tolosa. She promised him; and the other put on his spur, with which he had almost the same conversation as with the sword. He asked her name, and said that her name was La Molinera, and that she was the daughter of an honest miller of Antequera; to whom Don Quixote also begged to be called Dona, and to be called Dona Molinera, offering her new services and favours.
When the ceremonies hitherto hitherto hitherto had been performed at a gallop, Don Quixote did not wait to see himself on horseback and set out in search of adventures; and then saddling Rocinante, mounted it, and, embracing his guest, said such strange things to him, thanking him for the favour of having made him a knight, that it is impossible to relate them. The innkeeper, seeing him already out of the inn, replied to his own with no less rhetorical rhetoric, though in more brief words, and, without asking him for the cost of the inn, let him go at the right time.
Chapter 4: Of What Happened to Our Gentleman When He Left the Inn
That of dawn would be when Don Quixote came out of the inn, so happy, so gallant, so exultant at seeing himself already armed as a knight, that joy burst through his horse's girths. But remembering his guest's advice as to the necessary precautions he was to take with him, especially that of money and shirts, he determined to return to his house and make himself comfortable with everything, and with a squire, making it a note of receiving a farmer who was a neighbor of his, who was poor and had children.  but very much suited to the office of squire of chivalry. With this thought he guided Rocinante to his village, who, almost knowing the querencia, began to walk with such eagerness that it seemed as if he did not put his feet on the ground. He had not gone far, when it seemed to him that at his right hand, from the thicket of a forest that lay there, there came some delicate voices, as of a person complaining; and scarcely had he heard them, when he said, "I thank Heaven for the favour it has shown me, for it so readily sets before me occasions where I may do what I owe to my profession, and where I may reap the fruit of my good wishes: these voices are doubtless of some needy man or woman, who has needed my favor and help."  and turning the reins he led Rocinante to where it seemed to him that the voices were coming out; and a few paces after he entered the wood, he saw a mare tied to an oak, and tied to another a naked boy of fifteen years of age, who was the one who cried out, and not without cause, for he was being beaten many times with a waistband by a peasant of good stature.  And each scourge accompanied him with a rebuke and advice, for he said, "The tongue remains and the eyes are ready." And the boy answered, "I will not do it again, my lord; by the passion of God, I will not do it again, and I promise to take better care of the herd from now on. And when Don Quixote saw what was going on, he said in an angry voice, "Discourteous knight, it seems ill to take you with whom you cannot defend yourself; Get on your horse and take your spear (which also had a spear attached to the oak, where the mare was rented) and I will show you that what you are doing is cowardly.
The peasant, seeing this figure full of weapons above him, brandishing his lance over his face, thought himself dead, and with good words answered, "Sir knight, this boy I am punishing is one of my servants, who serves me to guard a flock of sheep that I have in these parts, which is so neglected that every day I am missing one.  and because I punish his carelessness or wickedness, he says that I am making him miserable, because I do not pay him the soldiery I owe him, and in God and in my soul that he lies. Is he lying, in front of me, you dastardly villain? said Don Quixote. By the sun that shines upon us, for I am about to pass you from one side to the other with this spear: pay him at once without further reply; if not, by the God who governs us, let him conclude and annihilate you on this point: loose him at once. The peasant bowed his head, and without answering a word untied his servant, to whom Don Quixote asked how much his master owed him. He said nine months, at seven reais every month. Don Quixote made the reckoning, and found that they amounted to sixty-three reals, and told the peasant to pay them at once, if he would not die for it. The dreadful villain replied that from the step he was in, and the oath he had sworn (and he had not yet sworn anything), that there were not so many, because he was to be deducted and taken into account three pairs of shoes which he had given him, and a real of two bloodlettings which had been made for him when he was ill. "All that is well," replied Don Quixote; but let the shoes and the bloodletting be kept for the lashes you have given him through no fault of his own, for if he broke the leather of the shoes you paid for, you have broken the leather of his body, and if the barber drew blood from him while he was sick, you have taken it out of him in health; So he doesn't owe you anything for this part. The trouble is, sir knight, that I have no money here: Andrew, come with me to my house, and I will pay you one real upon another."
"Shall I go with him," said the boy, "any more?" Bad year! No, sir, not even for the sake of it, for in seeing himself alone he will flay me like a St. Bartholomew." "He won't do that," replied Don
Quixote; It is enough for me to command him to respect me, and if he swears it to me by the law of chivalry which he has received, I will let him go free and secure his pay. "Look at what you say, senor," said the boy, "that this master of mine is not a gentleman, nor has he received any order of chivalry, and that he is Juan Haldudo the rich, a neighbor of the Quintanar."
"That matters little," replied Don Quixote, "for there may be knights in Haldudos, especially since each one is the son of his own works." "That is true," said Andrew; But this master of mine, of what works is he the son, since he denies me my soldiery and my sweat and toil? "I do not deny it, brother Andrew," replied the peasant, "and give me the pleasure of coming with me, for I swear, by all the orders of chivalry in the world, to pay you, as I have said, one real over another, and even smoked." "I amuse thee," said Don Quixote, "give it to him in reals, and I shall be content with that; and see to it that you do it as you have sworn; if not, by the same oath I swear to you again to seek you and to punish you, and that I will find you even if you hide more than a lizard. And if you wish to know who commands you this, in order that you may be more truly bound to do it, know that I am the valiant Don Quixote of La Mancha, the redresser of wrongs and unreason; and to God remain, and let not what has been promised and sworn be broken from your minds, on pain of the penalty pronounced.
And as he said this he stung his Rocinante, and in a short space he departed from them. The farmer followed him with his eyes, and when he saw that he had crossed the woods and was no longer visible, he turned to his servant Andrew and said to him, "Come hither, my son, for I want to pay you what I owe you, as that redresser of wrongs commanded me." "I swear that," said Andrés, "and it seems that your worship will be right in carrying out the commandment of that good knight, that he may live a thousand years, for according to the life of a brave man and a good judge, Roque lives, and if he does not pay me, let him return and do what he said." "I swear it too," said the farmer; But as much as I love you, I want to increase the debt for the sake of increasing the pay. And seizing him by the arm, he tied him again to the oak, where he gave him so many lashes that he left him for dead. "Summon, Senor Andrew, now," said the peasant, "the remover of grievances, and you will see how he does not distort this, though I do not think he has finished it, for I feel like skinning you alive, as you feared<BR< laughing.
And in this way the valiant Don Quixote undid the wrong, who, very glad of what had happened, and thinking that he had made a most happy and lofty beginning to his chivalry, went on his way to his village with great satisfaction with himself, saying in a low voice, "You may well call yourself happy above all who live on earth today, O over the beautiful,  beautiful Dulcinea del Toboso, for it fell to thee to have so brave and so named a knight subject and surrendered to all thy will and disposition, such a knight as Don Quixote of La Mancha is and will be, who, as everybody knows, yesterday received the order of chivalry, and to-day has committed the greatest one-eyed and wrongful act that unreason formed and cruelty committed; To-day he took the whip from the hand of that ruthless foe who had so inopportunely slain that delicate infant. At this moment he came to a road that divided into four, and then there came to his mind the crossroads where the knights-errant were thinking which of these roads they would take; and in order to imitate them, he remained for a while, and after he had thought it over he let go of the reins to Rocinante, leaving his own to the will of the squirrel, who followed his first attempt, which was to go on his way to his stable, and having gone about two miles, Don Quixote discovered a great crowd of people who,  as it was later learned, they were merchants from Toledo, who were going to buy in Murcia. There were six of them, and they came with their parasols, with four other servants on horseback, and three muleteers on foot.
No sooner had Don Quixote caught sight of them than he imagined it to be a matter of a new adventure, and in order to imitate in every way, as far as he could, the steps he had read in his books, it seemed to him that one he intended to make had come to him in the mould; and so, with gentle continent and boldness, he held fast in his stirrups, pressed his lance, put the buckler to his breast, and stood in the middle of the road and waited for those knights-errant to arrive (for he already considered them to be such, and judged them to be such); And when they came to
Don Quixote raised his voice as soon as they could be seen and heard, and with an arrogant gesture said, "Be damned by all the world, unless all the world confesses that there is not every maiden in the world more beautiful than the Empress of La Mancha, the peerless Dulcinea del Toboso."
The merchants stopped at these words, and when they saw the strange figure of the speaker, and by the figure and by them they immediately saw the madness of their owner, but they wanted to see slowly what the confession that was demanded of them ended; and one of them, who was a little mocking and very discreet, said to him, "Sir gentleman, we do not know who this good lady you speak of is; Show it to us, for if it be as beautiful as you signify, we will willingly and without any coercion confess the truth that is asked of us on your part. "If I were to show it to you," replied Don Quixote, "what would you do to confess so notorious a truth?" The importance is that without seeing it you have to believe, confess, affirm, swear and defend it; Where not, you are with me in battle, a colossal and proud people: that now you come one by one, as the order of chivalry demands, now all together, as is the custom and bad custom of those of your ilk, here I await and wait for you, confident in the reason that I have on my side. "Senor knight," replied the merchant, "I beseech your worship in the name of all these princes who are here, that we may not burden our consciences by confessing a thing which we have never seen or heard, and especially as it is so much to the detriment of the empresses and queens of Alcarria and Extremadura, that your worship will be so kind as to show us some portrait of that lady;  even if it is as big as a grain of wheat, the ball will be pulled out by the thread, and we shall be satisfied and sure of it, and your worship will be happy and paid; and I believe that we are now so much on her side, that although her portrait shows us that she is turreta in one eye, and that vermilion and sulphur stone flow from the other, yet for the sake of pleasing your worship, we will say in her favour all that you like." "It does not flow, you infamous scoundrel," replied Don Quixote, in a rage, "it does not flow, I say, what you say, but amber and algalia among cottons, and it is not one-eyed or crooked, but straighter than a spindle of Guadarrama; but you will pay for the great blasphemy which you have uttered against such a beauty as that of my lady. And as he said this, he rushed with his low lance at the one who had said it, with such fury and anger, that if good luck had not caused Rocinante to stumble in the middle of the road, the daring merchant would have had a hard time. Rocinante fell, and his master rolled a good game across the field, and when he tried to get up, he could never get up: his lance, spurs, and helmet caused him such embarrassment with the weight of the old weapons. And while he was struggling to get up and couldn't, he was saying: don't go, you cowardly people, captive people, take heed that it is not my fault, but my horse's, that I am lying here. One of the mule-boys who came there, who must not have been very well-intentioned, hearing the poor fallen man say so many arrogances, could not endure him without giving him the answer in the ribs. And going up to him, he took the lance, and after he had broken it to pieces, with one of them he began to give our Don Quixote so many blows that in spite of and in spite of his weapons he crushed him like a cybera. His masters cried out to him not to give him so much, and to leave him; but the young man was already stung, and would not give up the game until he had sent all the rest of his anger; and rushing for the other pieces of the spear, he finished undoing them on the fallen wretch, who, with all the tempest of sticks that was beating him, did not He shut his mouth, threatening heaven and earth and the scoundrels, as they seemed to him. The young man grew weary, and the merchants went on their way, carrying with them all the story of the poor man who had been beaten, who, when he saw himself alone, returned to try whether he could get up; But, if he couldn't do it when he was healthy and good, how could he do it ground and almost undone? And he still thought himself happy, thinking that this was the misfortune of knights-errant, and he attributed it all to the want of his horse; and it was not possible to get up, as his whole body was overwhelmed.
Chapter 5: Where the Narrative of Our Knight's Misfortune Is Continued
Seeing, therefore, that he could not move, he resolved to avail himself of his usual remedy, which was to think of some passage in his books, and his anger brought to his mind that of Baldovinos and the Marquis of Mantua, when Carloto left him wounded on the mountain. It is a story known to children, not unknown to young men, celebrated and even believed by old men, and yet no truer than the miracles of Mahomet. This, then, seemed to him to be a fit for the pace in which he found himself, and so, with signs of great feeling, he began to throw himself on the ground, and to say with feeble breath the same thing that the wounded knight of the forest is said to have said:
Where are you, my lady, that my evil does not grieve you?
Or don't you know, ma'am,
or you are false and disloyal.